---
layout: post
title: SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations)
categories: [Interpretable Machine learning]
---
In this post, I will introduce to Shapley values, which reflect contribution of features to output, how to calculate them, and SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), an interpretation method using Shapley values.
## Shapley values
Assuming one has a trained model which predicts house prices. Given a certain house which has a size of $$50 m^2$$, is near park, cats are banned, the model predicts its prices is 30000$. If the average prediction is 25000$, one wants to know how much each feature contributes to the prediction compared to average prediction.<br/>

$$\alpha_0+\alpha_1 * 50+\alpha_2 * cat\_banned +\alpha_3 * near\_park$$<br/>

If the model is simple linear regression, one can just look at its weights, because this type of model is interpretable based on its linearity. If the model is more complex, like neural network, one has to **interpret** it. <br/>

From game theory viewpoint, one can consider each feature as a player, and its contribution to total outcome compare to average prediction is player's payout. For example, size of 50, cat banned, near park contribute $$+3000$$$, $$-1000$$$, $$+3000$$$ respectively, and all of them working together make the $$+5000$$$ difference compared to average prediction.<br/>

We define Shapley value as the average marginal contribution of feature value across all possible coalitions. Intuitively, one can imagine Shapley value as payout of a player (feature).<br/>
How do we calculate Shapley values? Assuming one wants to find Shapley value of cat_banned, in a coalition of near_park. The size of 50 now is replaced randomly by 45, and the model predicts its price is $$27000$$$. Then cat_banned is replaced randomly by cat_allowed, and its price is predicted as $$31000$$$. The contribution of cat_banned is $$31000-27000=4000$$$. We keep sampling and average the contributions to get the final value.<br/>

As we have seen above, computation time increases exponentially with the number of features. If one has $$K$$ features, there might be $$2^K$$ possible coalitions. We need other ways to compute Shapley value in pratice.<br/>
 
 Now we formulate Shapley values explitcitly. For the $$jth$$ feature, its Shapley value is 
 $$$$\begin{aligned}
 \phi_j(val)=\sum_{S\in\{x_1,...x_p\}\backslash \{x_j\}}\frac{|S|!(p-|S|-1)!}{p!}(val(S\cup{x_j})-val(S))
\end{aligned}$$$$
where val function is defined as following
$$$$\begin{aligned}val_x(S)=\int \hat{f}(x_1,...,x_p)d\mathbb{P}_{x \notin S} - E_X(\hat{f}(X))
\end{aligned}$$$$
Shapley values have some properties, which help them having a reasonable foundation<br/>

- $$\textbf{Efficiency} \sum_{j=1}^p \phi_j = \hat{f}(x) - E_X(\hat{f}(X))$$<br/>
- $$\textbf{Symmetry}$$ If $$val(S \cup \{x_j\}) = val(S \cup \{x_k\})$$ for all $$S$$, then $$\phi_j = \phi_k$$<br/>
- $$\textbf{Dummy}$$ If $$val(S \cup \{x_j\}) = val(S)$$ for all $$S$$, then $$\phi_j = 0$$<br/>
- $$\textbf{Additivity}$$ For the model with combined value function $$val+val^+$$, the respective Shapley value is $$\phi+\phi^+$$<br/>

As we have seen above, computing Shapley values directly is expensive. Strumbelj et al. proposed a Monte-Carlo method to approximate these values
$$$$\begin{aligned}
\hat{\phi_j} = \frac{1}{M} \sum_{m=1}^M (\hat{f}(x_{+j}^m)-\hat{f}(x_{-j}^m))
\end{aligned}$$$$
where $$x_{+j}^m$$ is input with a random number of features except for $$x_j$$ replaced by a random data point, $$x_{-j}$$ is similar but the jth feature can be changed<br/>

## SHAP
Inspired by LIME, SHAP uses Additive feature attribution method to explain models locally<br/>
$$$$
    \begin{aligned}
        g(z')=\phi_0+\sum \phi_i*z_i'
    \end{aligned}
$$$$
where $$z' \in \{0,1\}^M$$ is $$\textit{simplified input}$$ which map to original input through mapping function $$x=h_x(x')$$<br/>

Using independence assumption, we can define mapping function as follow: For present (1) features, map them to the correspond feature of x. For absent (0) features, sample a data instance y and map them to the correspond feature of y.<br/>

SHAP has the following properties<br/>
- $$\textbf{Local accuracy}$$ $$f(x)=g(x')=\phi_0+\sum_{i=1}^M \phi_ix_i'$$. If we set $$\phi_0=f(h_x(0))$$, this is exactly Efficiency property<br/>
- $$\textbf{Missingness}$$ $$x_i'=0 \implies \phi_i=0$$. Simplified feature being zero means this feature is constant, then its Shapley value must be zero<br/>
- $$\textbf{Consistency}$$ Let $$f_x(z')=f(h_x(z'))$$ and $$z_{\\j'}$$ indicates that $$z_i' = 0$$. For any models $$f$$ and $$f'$$ satisfying
$$$$
\begin{aligned}
f_x'(z')-f_x'(z_{\setminus{}j}')\geq{}f_x(z')-f_x(z_{\setminus{}j}')
\end{aligned}$$$$
for all $$z' \in \{0,1\}^M$$, then
$$$$
\begin{aligned}
\phi_j(f',x)\geq\phi_j(f,x)
\end{aligned}$$$$<br/>

There is a theorem which states that there is only one explanable model which satisfies these properties<br/>
How do we find it? Recall that for LIME, we try to minizing the following function
$$$$
\begin{aligned}
\epsilon = argmin_{g \in \mathcal{G}} L(f,g,\pi_{x'}) + \Omega(g)
\end{aligned}
$$$$<br/>
Usually, LIME uses Gaussian kernel, the further data instance is, the smaller it weights. For SHAP, few absent features and few present features get large weights. Intuitively, if simplified input only has one present feature, we learn about its main effect, if simplified input has all but one present feature, we learn about its main effect and feature interaction. Lundberg et. al proposed SHAP kernel
$$$$
\begin{aligned}
\pi_{x}(z')=\frac{(M-1)}{\binom{M}{|z'|}|z'|(M-|z'|)}
\end{aligned}$$$$
where $$|z'|$$ is the number of present features in $$z'$$<br/>
They proved that using SHAP kernel with LIME, we can obtain Shapley values.
## References
- [Interpretable machine learning](https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/shap.html)
- [A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/7062-a-unified-approach-to-interpreting-model-predictions)
